# Managing self and family

How did you manage yourself and your family during this period?

S-Ish- Since my family has always been supportive, it didn’t feel like a big deal. Everyone else adjusted according to our needs. My decision and my clarity was enough for all of them. My mother even moved closer to our house to help me out as I was juggling between different therapy centers. I wanted to get back to my career at some point but those thoughts came slowly as and when we were feeling slightly settled. I got to complete my PG course as well. Now I am able to leave Ish and go away for my work at least for a few hours and then come back. I feel like I have come a long way.

HM - My family was not very supportive. It was just my husband and I. I started attending to M full time. It was becoming overwhelming to manage household chores and M at home. I lacked the motivation to follow through M’s interventions even though I knew what had to be done. Now I have come a long way and learnt so many things. I plan and organize my work better in order to balance my personal work and M’s works. I also take or ask for help actively. I have learnt to do that and I am grateful.

SS -  I dedicated myself to my family. I wish I had said no to other commitments now. I couldn’t fully focus on S because of the other commitments. Right now, I am happy we are here. My youngest kid is also getting the right education and S is getting to be with him as well. So I am happy, going with the flow. Kids are my 1st priority for now and right now it is S. I have wasted a lot of time already and do not want to waste anymore.

SG - I made up my mind that now I will have to spend more time with my kid. I had to give up on my career as a lecturer, but I don’t regret it. I feel I can get back to it anytime, right now G is my focus. And I don’t feel whatever I'm doing currently is very different from what I wanted to do. I wanted to go to the hospital and work at some point, I would be serving the older population there, here I am serving the child population. My in-laws and husband were very supportive. I had difficulty managing time for the first 1 year then I learnt to prioritize. My family has supported me and my decisions consistently. They also learn the interventions and that helps in being consistent with G. They took time to accept AVAZ, but it wasn’t very difficult to convince them when I stayed put.
